declarative.md, before:


Declarative Programming
=======================

\label{sec:declarative}

Mathematical experts often lack training to produce efficient modular software.  Discuss how the projects above made use of declarative techniques to separate mathematical expertise from algorithmic term rewriting.  

------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------
 Background   Stratego/XT, Maude, miniKanren (a simple embedding in Scheme).
              Considerations about term rewrite systems.                                        

 Approach     [Strategies](http://github.com/logpy/strategies) and 
              [LogPy](http://github.com/logpy/logpy), 
              implementations of miniKanren and Stratego in Python 

 Results      Look at use of these systems in above work 
              and in other work in Theano
------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------

### Motivation

Separation of mathematical logic and algorithmic control aligns well with the distribution of expertise within scientific computing.


### Background

include [Pattern Matching](pattern.md)

include [LogPy](logpy.md)

include [Algorithm Search](search.md)

Commit message:

many changes to PL section

declarative.md, after:


Program Generation
==================

\label{sec:declarative}

To automatically transform a set of mathematical expressions to an efficient and sophisticated computation we require substantial expertise both in the relevant mathematical domain and in the automated compilation of programs.  Unfortunately few mathematical experts also hold compilers expertise.

To resolve this demographic issue we separate the problem into two parts:

1.  A collection of small mathematical transformations 
2.  A system to coordinate their application
    
The small transformations encompass the mathematical expertise and are sufficiently isolated to not require substantial expertise in compilers.  This piece is appropriate for mathematicians.  Conversely the system to coordinate their application is isolated from the mathematical domain and encompasses all of the necessary expertise in automated generation of computations.  This piece is appropriate for computer scientists.  This separation enables contributions from a substantially broader single-domain-of-expertise demographic.

For further convenience to the mathematical expert the majority of the transformations are encoded as declarative rewrite rules specified in a computer algebra system.  This practice aligns well with the written tradition of mathematics.

In section \ref{sec:pattern} we discuss the pattern matching problem in the context of computer algebra and then in \ref{sec:logpy} our particular software solution to this problem.  In section \ref{sec:search} we pose the problem of coordinating these rules as a graph search problem.  These respectively address parts 1 and 2 listed above.

In section \ref{sec:math-num-linalg} we demonstrate the utility of these tools by implementing a mathematically informed linear algebra compiler with minimal math/compilers expertise overlap.

include [Pattern Matching](pattern.md)

include [LogPy](logpy.md)

include [Algorithm Search](search.md)
