sympy.md, before:

SymPy
-----

SymPy enables the expression and manipulation of mathematical terms.  In real analysis a mathematical term may be either

*   A literal like `5`
*   A variable like `x`
*   A compound term like `5 + x` composed of an operator like `+` and a list of child terms `(5, x)`

We store expressions in a tree data structure in which each node is either an operator or a leaf term.  For example the expresion $\log(3 e^{x + 2})$ can be stored as follows

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=.4\textwidth]{images/expr}
\label{fig:expr}
\end{figure}

### Manipulation

A computer algebra system collects and applies functions to manipulate these data structures.  A common class of these functions is used to perform mathematical simplifications.  In the example with $\log(3 e^{x + 2})$ we can expand the log and cancel the log/exp to form $x+2+\log(3)$.  

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=.4\textwidth]{images/sexpr}
\label{fig:expr}
\end{figure}

### Extensions

Systems exist for the automatic expression of several branches of mathematics.  Extensive work has been done on traditional real and complex analysis including derivatives, integrals, simplification, equation solving, etc.... Other algebras like sets, groups, fields, polynomials, abstract and differential geometry, combinatorics and number theory all have similar treatments.  The literals, variables, and manipulations change but the basic idea of automatic manipulation of expression trees remains constant.

### Software

A computer algebra system is composed of a data structure to represent mathematical expressions in a computer, a syntax for the idiomatic construction of trees by mathematical users, and a collection of functions for common mathematical routines.

SymPy is a computer algebra system embedded in the Python language.  It implements these pieces as follows

#### Operators

Both SymPy operators and SymPy literal types are implemented as Python classes.

~~~~~~~~~~Python
# Literal Types
class Symbol(Basic):
    ...
class Integer(Basic):
    ...

# Operators
class Add(Basic):
    ...
class Mul(Basic):
    ...
class Log(Basic):
    ...
~~~~~~~~~~

Literal and variable terms are instantiated as Python objects.  Standard Python variables are used for indentifying information.

~~~~~~~~~~Python
one = Integer(1)  # 1 is a Python int
x = Symbol('x')   # 'x' is a Python string
~~~~~~~~~~

Compound terms are also instantiated as Python objects which contain SymPy terms as children

~~~~~~~~~~Python
y = Add(x, 1)
z = Mul(3, Add(x, 5), Log(y))
~~~~~~~~~~

Every term can be fully described by its type and its children which are stored as an instance variable, `.args`

~~~~~~~~~~Python
>>> type(y)
Add
>>> y.args
(x, 1)
~~~~~~~~~~

At the lowest level SymPy manipulations are then just Python functions which inspect these terms, manipulate them with Python functions, and return the new versions.


### Syntax and Printing

Reading and writing terms like `z = Mul(3, Add(x, 5), Log(y))` can quickly become cumbersome, particularly for mathematical users generate large complex equations.  

For user convenience the classes for operators and literals overload hooks for Python syntax like `__add__` and `__mul__` and for string representation and interactive printing like `__str__`.  Together these provide an intuitive interactive experience for mathematical users

~~~~~~~~~~Python
>>> x = Symbol('x')
>>> y = log(3*exp(x + 2))
>>> print y
log(3*exp(x + 2))

>>> print simplify(y)
x + log(3) + 2
~~~~~~~~~~

Commit message:

add minor changes to sympy.md

sympy.md, after:

SymPy
-----

SymPy enables the expression and manipulation of mathematical terms.  In real analysis a mathematical term may be either

*   A literal like `5`
*   A variable like `x`
*   A compound term like `5 + x` composed of an operator like `Add` and a list of child terms `(5, x)`

We store expressions in a tree data structure in which each node is either an operator or a leaf term.  For example the expresion $\log(3 e^{x + 2})$ can be stored as follows

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=.4\textwidth]{images/expr}
\label{fig:expr}
\end{figure}

### Manipulation

A computer algebra system collects and applies functions to manipulate these tree data structures.  A common class of these functions is used to perform mathematical simplifications returning mathematically equivalent but combinatorially simpler expression trees.  In the example with $\log(3 e^{x + 2})$ we can expand the log and cancel the log/exp to form $x+2+\log(3)$.  

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=.4\textwidth]{images/sexpr}
\label{fig:expr}
\end{figure}

### Extensions

Systems exist for the automatic expression of several branches of mathematics.  Extensive work has been done on traditional real and complex analysis including derivatives, integrals, simplification, equation solving, etc.... Other algebras like sets, groups, fields, polynomials, abstract and differential geometry, combinatorics and number theory all have similar treatments.  The literals, variables, and manipulations change but the basic idea of automatic manipulation of expression trees remains constant.

### Software

A computer algebra system is composed of a data structure to represent mathematical expressions in a computer, a syntax for the idiomatic construction of trees by mathematical users, and a collection of functions for common mathematical routines.

SymPy is a computer algebra system embedded in the Python language.  It implements these pieces as follows

#### Operators

Both SymPy operators and SymPy literal types are implemented as Python classes.

~~~~~~~~~~Python
# Literal Types
class Symbol(Basic):
    ...
class Integer(Basic):
    ...

# Operators
class Add(Basic):
    ...
class Mul(Basic):
    ...
class Log(Basic):
    ...
~~~~~~~~~~

Literal and variable terms are instantiated as Python objects.  Standard Python variables are used for indentifying information.

~~~~~~~~~~Python
one = Integer(1)  # 1 is a Python int
x = Symbol('x')   # 'x' is a Python string
~~~~~~~~~~

Compound terms are also instantiated as Python objects which contain SymPy terms as children

~~~~~~~~~~Python
y = Add(x, 1)
z = Mul(3, Add(x, 5), Log(y))
~~~~~~~~~~

Every term can be fully described by its type and its children which are stored as an instance variable, `.args`

~~~~~~~~~~Python
>>> type(y)
Add
>>> y.args
(x, 1)
~~~~~~~~~~

At the lowest level SymPy manipulations are then just Python functions which inspect these terms, manipulate them with Python statements, and return the new versions.


### Syntax and Printing

Reading and writing terms like `z = Mul(3, Add(x, 5), Log(y))` can quickly become cumbersome, particularly for mathematical users generate large complex equations.  

For user convenience the classes for operators and literals overload hooks for Python syntax like `__add__` and `__mul__` and for string representation and interactive printing like `__str__`.  Together these provide an intuitive interactive experience for mathematical users

~~~~~~~~~~Python
>>> from sympy import Symbol, log, exp, simplify
>>> x = Symbol('x')
>>> y = log(3*exp(x + 2))
>>> print y
log(3*exp(x + 2))

>>> print simplify(y)
x + log(3) + 2
~~~~~~~~~~
