trs-background.md, before:


Background
----------

\label{sec:pattern-previous-work}
\label{sec:trs-background}

Logic programming and term rewrite systems benefit from substantial theory and mature software packages.

#### Software Systems

Several mature term rewrite systems exist.  In spirit these descend from logic programming, first popularized by the Prolog language in the early seventies.  Today systems like Maude and Elan from the OBJ family and the Stratego/XT toolset use term rewriting for the declarative definition of and optimization within languages.  They serve as repositories for results from academic research.

#### OBJ: Maude, Elan 

The Maude system\cite{Clavel1996} uses term rewriting to support a meta-programming environment.  The Maude language provides syntax to define syntax for other languages.  It also enables the description of rewrite rules to transform terms in that language.  Rewrite rules are separated into a set of confluent equations and a set of non-confluent rewrite rules.  The non-confluent rules can be applied in two built-in strategies.  Elan\cite{Borovansky2002} differs from Maude in that it enables users to specify custom strategies.


#### Stratego/XT

The Stratego/XT\cite{Visser2004} toolset contains several separate tools to support the definition of syntax, language, transformations on terms within that language, and strategies to coordinate the application of those transformations.  This orthogonal approach separates many of the ideas that are present in systems like Elan into distinct, clearly defined ideas.


#### Search Strategies

Systems like Prolog hard-wire a single specific traversal into the transformation system.  It includes backtracking to allow the search to walk out of dead ends and continuation to allow a user to lazily request additional results.  Maude extends this system with the option of "fair rewrites" that samples from the applicable transformations with a round-robin policy.  

While these strategies are useful in the common case it may be that a problem requires custom traversal for efficient computation.  Systems like Elan enable developers to specify search strategies within their program.  Elan includes terms like `repeat` to exhaustively evaluate a particular strategy or `dc one` to non-deterministically applies one of a set of strategies.  The Stratego/XT reinforces this idea by isolating it into it's own separate language Stratego.  Stratego enables the description of complex traversals independent of any particular search problem.


#### Pattern Matching Challenges

Pattern matching in some form is ubiquitous in modern programming languages.  Unification of terms has long been a cornerstone of both logic programming languages and of theorem provers.  Basic algorithms exist in standard texts on artificial intelligence\cite{aima}.

However, as mentioned in Section \ref{sec:pattern-concerns}, mathematical theories can be pathological both because they may require very many rewrite patterns and because they make heavy use of associative-commutative operators.


#### Many Patterns

Because these patterns are used at every transformation step and because the collection changes infrequently it makes sense to store them in an indexed data structure that trades insertion time for query time.  Discrimination nets are often used in practice \cite{Christian1993}.  These provide simultaneous matching of one input term to many stored rewrite patterns in logarithmic time.

#### Associative-Commutative Matching

Including the traditional definitions of associativity and commutativity in the rule set may lengthen compute times beyond a reasonable threshold.

$$ f(x, f(y, z)) = f(f(x, y), f(z)) $$
$$ f(x, y) = f(y, x) $$

Instead operators that follow one or both of the associative-commutative identities are often specifically handled within the implementation of the term rewrite system.  For instance Maude requests that users mark such operators with special annotations.

In the simple case associativity may be handled by a round of flattening to n-ary trees (e.g. $f(x, f(y, z)) \rightarrow f(x, y, z)$) and commutativity by bipartite graph matching\cite{Eker1995}.  Because associative-commutative operators often occur in theories with many rewrite patterns, these two problems may be solved simultaneously for greatest efficiency.  Discrimination nets can be extended (using multiple nets) to efficiently index many associative-commutative patterns\cite{Bachmair1993, Kirchner2001}, supporting many-to-one associative-commutative matching.

Commit message:

edits in trs - other than search-direct

trs-background.md, after:


Background
----------

\label{sec:pattern-previous-work}
\label{sec:trs-background}

Logic programming and term rewrite systems benefit from substantial theory and mature software packages.

#### Software Systems

Several mature term rewrite systems exist.  In spirit these descend from logic programming, first popularized by the Prolog language in the early seventies.  Today systems like Maude and Elan from the OBJ family and the Stratego/XT toolset use term rewriting for the declarative definition of and optimization within languages.  They serve as repositories for results from academic research.

#### OBJ: Maude, Elan 

The Maude system\cite{Clavel1996} uses term rewriting to support a meta-programming environment.  The Maude language provides syntax to define syntax for other languages.  It also enables the description of rewrite rules to transform terms in that language.  Rewrite rules are separated into a set of confluent equations and a set of non-confluent rewrite rules.  The non-confluent rules can be applied using two built-in strategies.  Elan\cite{Borovansky2002} differs from Maude in that it enables users to specify custom strategies.


#### Stratego/XT

The Stratego/XT\cite{Visser2004} toolset contains several separate tools to support the definition of syntax, language, transformations on terms within that language, and strategies to coordinate the application of those transformations.  This orthogonal approach separates many of the ideas that are present in systems like Elan into distinct, clearly defined ideas.


#### Search Strategies

Systems like Prolog hard-wire a single specific traversal into the transformation system.  It includes backtracking to allow the search to walk out of dead ends and continuation to allow a user to lazily request additional results.  Maude extends this system with the option of "fair rewrites" that samples from the applicable transformations with a round-robin policy.  

While these strategies are useful in the common case it may be that a problem requires custom traversal for efficient computation.  Systems like Elan enable developers to specify search strategies within their program.  Elan includes terms like `repeat` to exhaustively evaluate a particular strategy or `dc one` to non-deterministically apply one of a set of strategies.  Stratego/XT reinforces this idea by isolating it into it's own separate language Stratego.  Stratego enables the description of complex traversals independent of any particular search problem.


#### Pattern Matching Challenges

Pattern matching in some form is ubiquitous in modern programming languages.  Unification of terms has long been a cornerstone of both logic programming languages and of theorem provers.  Basic algorithms exist in standard texts on artificial intelligence\cite{aima}.

However, as mentioned in Section \ref{sec:pattern-concerns}, mathematical theories can be pathological both because they may require very many rewrite patterns and because they make heavy use of associative-commutative operators.


#### Many Patterns

Because these patterns are used at every transformation step and because the collection changes infrequently it makes sense to store them in an indexed data structure that trades insertion time for query time.  Discrimination nets are often used in practice \cite{Christian1993}.  These provide simultaneous matching of one input term to many stored rewrite patterns in logarithmic rather than linear time.

#### Associative-Commutative Matching

Including the traditional definitions of associativity and commutativity in the rule set may lengthen compute times beyond a reasonable threshold.

Instead operators that follow one or both of the associative-commutative identities are often specifically handled within the implementation of the term rewrite system.  For instance Maude requests that users mark such operators with special annotations.

In the simple case associativity may be handled by a round of flattening to n-ary trees (e.g. $f(x, f(y, z)) \rightarrow f(x, y, z)$) and commutativity by bipartite graph matching\cite{Eker1995}.  Because associative-commutative operators often occur in theories with many rewrite patterns, these two problems may be solved simultaneously for greatest efficiency.  Discrimination nets can be extended (using multiple nets) to efficiently index many associative-commutative patterns\cite{Bachmair1993, Kirchner2001}, supporting many-to-one associative-commutative matching.
